----------------------
      GAME BOT
Operating instructions
----------------------

License
-------
Game Bot is imaginary drum machine written in Native Instrument's Kontakt script. You need full version of Kontakt 4.2 or newer to make it work. You are licensed to use this device, in the creation of a recorded or live sound performance, free or commercial, without paying any license fees or providing attribution. Please DO NOT: sell, repackage or re-distribute sampler program/script.
USE AT YOUR OWN RISK! This device is provided "as is" and there is no warranty of any kind. It is experimental device, there is no guarantee it will produce any useful results or that it will work at all.
This device relies on synchronization with host’s transport, it may happen it will not work properly with some hosts, although it should work in standalone Kontakt. If the device doesn't seem work and display "initializing" message, try starting transport (press "play" in your DAW). Also it may require considerably large amount of processing power.

Game Bot is based on Gameboy drum sample set by bedroomproducersblog.com.

Introduction
------------
Game Bot can generate drum patterns and drum kits based on "seed" number. Patterns will play back according to host tempo. Besides drum pattern sequencer, the machine can use modulation sequencer. It will create sequences of values for modulated parameters, such as pitch, panorama, filters cutoff and resonance, amount of distortion, send levels for reverb and delay. The machine will then sweep from one value to next value using one of transition curves, in similar way to traditional LFO. Modulation sequencer can use equivalents of square, triangle and derivatives of sine waveforms. The machine has 10 voices, each voice has one note sequencer and 12 modulation sequencers. Sequencers can run at different correlated speeds and with different program length, to create more variation.

Generating sequences
--------------------
Sequencers program generation is fully automated. When you press "shuffle" button the machine will pick a random "seed" number and generate note and modulation sequences from the seed. "Unshuffle" button serves and "undo" function, it will take you back to previous "seed" and restore all sequences. To make "seed" names more human friendly, the machine will also generate preset names. Current preset name is displayed on small panel in left-bottom corner of user interface. The machine's dictionary is somewhat limited, so preset names are not necessarily unique, however getting different programs with the same name is not likely. "Mutate" button is small scale shuffle function, it will generate new sequences for just one layer/voice. Mutated presets are marked with "+" suffix in the name. Also "mutate" function doesn't pick random numbers, but derives "layer seed" values from current program "seed", so each preset will generate the same mutation sequence. However if you use "unshuffle" function and then use "mutate" again, previously generated mutation will be skipped.

Starting sequencers
-------------------
To start playing back note sequencer program press "start" button, located in upper-right corner of the user interface. To start modulation sequencer press "wave" button below. Modulation sequencer is designed to gradually change modulated settings, it will start from current settings and modulate values in such way, so they reach next sequence step value at destination point. Sequencers run at different speeds, so different values have different change dynamics. When you stop modulation sequencer, modulated values will freeze at current positions, when you start modulation again, the machine will find new target values and start to modulate from current settings. If you want reset modulated settings to default, use "fade-out" button (located below wave button), this function will set default values as targets and keep modulators running until they all reach default values. Then modulator engine will be turned off automatically. To reset modulators immediately, press "fade-out" button while holding Control key (ctrl + click). All those functions can be automated with midi notes.
All sequencers are synchronized with transport position and tempo. When you start the machine in the middle of the song, sequence playback positions should be re-calculated. Note that for modulation sequencer it will take some time to change values, as they are not being applied immediately.

Performance tweaks
------------------
You can tweak several controls which have impact on sounds and sequences generated by Game Bot.
"Circuit" knob selects one of pre-programmed sequence generator settings. If affects speed and loop length distribution between different sequences, as well as sequence structure. When you change the settings, the machine will generate all sequences from scratch, according to new set of settings, so it may cause temporal CPU spikes. This setting also changes pitch envelope generator setup, so some sounds may playback differently.
"Turbo" switch changes note sequencers base speed. When turbo in on, all sequences will play at double speed, according to current tempo. Turbo only applies to note sequencers, modulation sequences are not affected by this setting.
"Remix" knob re-maps the "drum kit", it will shift the sample map, so different sounds are being assigned to sequences.
"Stretch" knob affects the note lengths and volume envelope settings. Tweak it to play shorter or longer sounds.
"Drive" knob is overall gain settings. Gain is being applied before a brickwall limiter, separately for each layer.
"Variation" knob selects one of variation modes. Variations will introduce small changes to current sequence, it can change volume, pitch settings and sample assignments for some layers/voices. It can also turn off some layers completely. Each "seed" generates unique variation program, so for each program variation has different effect.

Drum machine
------------
Game Bot can also function as regular drum machine, it will accept incoming midi notes and play drum sounds according to received pattern. "Single sound" keys are marked with blue color on virtual keyboard. "Drum kit" configuration is dependent on current sequence "seed", so each preset generates its own drum kit. You can also change sounds tweaking "remix" knob. "Stretch" knob will affect volume envelope release and "circuit" knob affects pitch envelope settings. You can keep modulation sequencer running to mix it with "external" drum patterns.

Variation play
--------------
"Variation play" is a function that can be assigned for midi notes. If assigned note is being pressed, sequencers will start automatically and the machine will select specified variation of the program. Variation will be played back until the triggering key will be released. Assigned keys are being colored green on virtual keyboard. This function can be used to play different preset variations from keyboard.

Event monitor
-------------
Game Bot is equipped with simple event monitor. When you press "info button" ("i"), Machine credits and event monitor are being displayed on memory panel. There are ten rectangles, each for every voice, which will flash whenever a note is being played. Below there is a cluster of vertical lines, when modulation sequencer is running each line represents current state of modulated setting.

Space
-----
There is a set of "space" effects, two convolution reverbs and two delays in send mode. The modulators distribute signal between effects to create varying and evolving space. So until you start modulation sequencers, the space effect will be static mix of one reverb and one delay. You can tweak effect settings with "green controls". "Reverb" and "delay" knobs control output gain of reverb and delay sections. "Space" button calls randomizer function. Similarly to sequence pattern generator, space randomizer will pick a "seed" number and derive reverb and delay settings from it. It will select impulse response files from Kontakt's factory library. If you like, you can change send effects, use algorithmic reverb instead of convolution, or phaser instead of delays. Randomizer will recognize send effect types available in Kontakt 4 and configure setting accordingly. Just remember that only first four send effect slots are used.
"Stereo" knob sets stereo placement width setting. It is a scaler for modulator sequencers, panorama setting for each voice is being controlled by modulators and "stereo" knobs sets limits of modulation. So, at 50% setting all voices will be placed between 50% left and 50% right.

Preset memory
-------------
Game Bot has preset memory system, you can save generated patterns and settings to recall them later. The machine doesn't actually save all sequencer programs, but seed numbers used to generate it, so sequences are being re-built from id number when you load a preset. The machine will store main seed number, 10 sub-seed numbers used for mutate function and state of tweak controls: remix, stretch, drive, variation, circuit and turbo. There are 300 save slots available, organized into 3 banks of 10 pages, 10 save slots per page. To change a bank use "A", "B" or "C" button. To select a page use a button from horizontal row beneath memory display.
Buttons in vertical row at the left side of memory display will perform memory operation: read, write or clear. In default "read" mode, just press a memory slot button to read a preset. To write a preset, press write button and then pick a memory slot to write to. After saving data the machine will switch back to read mode. You can also use "clear" button to delete saved preset.
The entire memory is being saved with other settings whenever you save Kontakt patch to nki file or you save a DAW project. You can also dump all memory to disk and restore it in another instance of the instrument. Use "file" button will call up a menu for memory operations. "Save memory to disk" function will save all memory tables, files are being placed in "data" folder where you sampler files are being installed. Note that saving memory to disk will overwrite any previously saved data. "Restore memory from disk" function will read saved tables from data folder and fill instrument memory, discarding any previously saved presets.
Memory operations also offer page copy/paste function which will copy all presets on selected page at once. Finally there are "clear" functions which can be applied to selected page or whole memory. There is no undo for memory operations so use them wisely.
Besides sequencer programs, memory can also be used to save effects configuration, that is impulse response file names and send effects settings. To save a "space" use green button in lower-left corner of memory display, memory will be set in write mode automatically, then you can pick an empty memory slot. Saved preset will be named "space" followed by id number. Note that actual configuration is not being saved, the machine only saves "seed" numbers, as it does with the patterns. So memory can be only used to saved automatically generated "spaces". Send levels and stereo settings are not being saved either.

Automation keys
---------------
Various functions of the machine can be assigned to midi notes. You can edit note assignments freely. Use "keys" button to bring up configuration panel. You will see the list of functions with note numbers used to automate them. You can edit the mapping manually or use midi learn function ("L" buttons). To disable automation type in -1 as the note number.
Here's the list of automatable functions:
"play var. x" – play a variation, as described in "variation play". There is optional switch for this function, labeled "play with modulators", if the switch is enabled, pressing variation key will start note sequencers, as well as modulation sequencers, otherwise only note sequencers will be automated.
"start sequ" – starts/stops note sequencers.
"start modul" – starts/stops modulation sequencers.
"fade modul" – automates "fade-out" modulation button.
"reset modul" – resets modulators, as ctrl+click "fade-out" button.
"reset clock" – restarts sequencers, as on transport start, when you press play in DAW.
"trans.up/down/etc." – bit transformations of seed number, will generate different presets based on current number. E.g. pressing "up" and then "down" will take you back to initial preset, just as pressing "up" five times, or "invert" two times.
"memory x" – memory slot button, loads a preset.
"page x" – change memory page.
"reset ctrls" – resets performance controls: variation, remix, reverb amount, stereo spread, etc.
"mutate" – automate "mutate" button.
"shuffle" – automate "shuffle" button.
"unshuffle" – automate "unshuffle" button.
"kick", "snare", "hihat" ... "sfx" - key assignment for playing single sounds.

Defined key mapping can be saved to a file and loaded later to another instance of the instrument - use "edit" menu. Key mapping will be also saved within nki file or DAW project. Default kay map is saved in "data" folder, named "key_map.nka", it can be loaded manually.

Power switches
--------------
There are five power switches in automation panel. They are not related with key mapping. "Volume mod" switch enables/disables volume modulation controlled by modulation sequencers. It is disabled by default, if you turn it on, the machine will start to animate volume levels of voices/layers and some sound sequences will appear/disappear in time. "Pitch mod" enables/disables pitch modulators, turn it off, if you don't want modulation sequencers to affect pitch of the sounds. "Filter" switch will enable/disable filters, filters are being placed in each layer effect chain and are being modulated by modulation sequencers. When you disable filters, all filter effects will be set to bypass mode. "Reverb"/"delay" buttons will enable/disable reverb and delay units, use them if you don't want to use those effects and you want to save CPU cycles.

This concludes the manual. Have fun.
SzcZ

-----------------------
© 2015 SzcZ
www.fairlyconfusing.net
-----------------------